1. XML: XML is a simple, very flexible text format derived from Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), ISO 8879, Information processing – Text and office systems – Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML). Originally designed to meet the challenges of large-scale electronic publishing, XML is also playing an increasingly important role in the interoperability of a wide variety of data on the Web and elsewhere. 
2.  Namespaces in XML: XML Namespaces13 are a simple and straightforward way to distinguish names used in XML documents. XML Namespaces provide a simple method for qualifying element and attribute names by associating them with namespaces identified by Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)14 references. shared vocabularies and allow machines to carry out rules made by people. They provide a means for defining the structure, content, and semantics of XML documents in more detail. 
3. OMG XML Metadata Interchange (XMI): The main purpose of XMI (ISO/IEC 19503, Information technology – XML Metadata Interchange (XMI), is to enable easy interoperability of metadata between application development life-cycle tools such as modeling tools based on UML (ISO/IEC 19501, Information technology – Open Distributed Processing – Unified Modeling Language [UML]), and metadata repositories/frameworks based on the Meta Object Facility [MOF]) (ISO/IEC 19502, Information technology – Meta Object Facility [MOF]), in distributed heterogeneous environments. XMI integrates the following three key industry standards:
4. STEP Application Protocols (APs): "Standard for the Exchange of Product (STEP) model data for systems engineering" or ISO 10303 "Industrial automation systems and integration — Product data representation and exchange," contains various APs. The STEP APs (e.g. ISO 10303, Part 209; Part 210, Industrial automation systems and integration - Product data representation and exchange - Application protocol: Electronic assembly, interconnect and packaging design; Part 233; Part 238; Part 239; or Part 242) capture data on components and systems to improve computer-sensible sharing of important product information by supporting the capture, interoperability, and archive systems engineering information across disciplines and organizations. See STEP AP descriptions in K.2, References.