Processes enable the integration of diverse human and systems activities to coordinate the exchange of services and data/information, including process design, process execution, and process monitoring. A Process Architecture is a description of the program/project business processes. The Process Architecture establishes standards in how the program/project will create, manage, and control program/project data. A Process Architecture describes data interoperability
requirements at defined life-cycle states and maturity levels describes which processes will be applied across all projects (e.g. safety and mission assurance, deviations and waivers, corrective actions, and problem resolution); and identifies the source for documented common nomenclatures and schemes for product naming, numbering, and version control

The MBE Process Architecture defines flow of the program/project data, the roles and responsibilities for data handling, and the approval authority. The Process Architecture should clearly define, control, and integrate business and engineering processes for program/project execution based on results from life-cycle cost analyses. Processes should be subjected to value-added analysis techniques (e.g. streamlined, efficient, effective processes) prior to implementation. A well-defined Process Architecture will ensure that every person or organization involved executes the process. Each process to be used is fully documented so that everyone understands their respective involvement in the process.

The program/project manager and delegated Technical Authority(s) are responsible for defining the relationship between businesses and engineering processes and documenting these relationships in the MBE Plan. The Agency CIO and applicable Mission Directorate are responsible for implementing the requirements of the Process Architecture 

If established early and properly, the key benefit of the MBE Process Architecture is that all program/project team members will clearly understand data control and release, including which data are authoritative and the process through which the data are released to become authoritative